Create a db patch (#575)
canonical/launchpad-manual: docs/developer/how-to/common-development-tasks/create-a-db-patch.rst

.. meta::
   :description: Comprehensive step-by-step guide to create database schema
      patch.

.. _create-a-db-patch:

Create a database patch
=======================

Background

> ----------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> We change the schema through database patches. These live in branches

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Launchpad's schema is changed through database patches. These live in branches
```

2nd or 3rd person is the default voice in documentation

that go through review and landing, just like code changes.

Schema patches are either applied while the system has no activity
('cold patches') or while the system is under load ('hot patches'). Some
things, like changing a table **and** adding an index, will need to be

> split into two separate patches - one hot and one cold.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Schema patches can either be applied while the system has no activity
(cold patches) or while the system is under load (hot patches). Changes such as
changing a table **and** adding an index, must be split into two separate
patches - one hot and one cold.
```
What does `changing a table` mean in this context?

See :ref:`database-patching` for more information about how cold/hot
patching works.

Schema patches must **not** be combined with changes to the Launchpad
python code - any branch landing on devel or db-devel must be one or the

> other. Test \*only\* code may be included if absolutely necessary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
other. **Test only** code may be included if absolutely necessary.
```

Exceptions to this rule require approval from the project lead, because
deploying them will require a 1 hour plus complete downtime window.

Making a database patch
-----------------------

You need to run these steps whenever you make a schema change:

> 1. Run ``make schema`` to get a pristine database of sample data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In your local development Launchpad instance, run ``make schema`` to get a pristine database of sample data.
```
Where is this being run? I'm assuming this will be in the local development instance

2. Add a patch number in `the dbpatches
   repository <https://code.launchpad.net/~launchpad/+git/dbpatches>`__.

>    If you are in ``~launchpad`` please allocate this yourself. Other

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   If you are in the ``~launchpad`` team please allocate this yourself. Other
```
How does one allocate a patch number?

>    developers can ask any ~launchpad member to allocate a patch number for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   developers can ask any ``~launchpad`` member to allocate a patch number for
```

   them.

>    Commit and directly push to the main branch. No review is needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Commit and push directly to the main branch. No review is needed.
```

3. Create a SQL file named ``patch-XXXX-YY-Z.sql`` in ``database/schema/``,

>    where ``XXXX-YY-Z`` is the patch number you allocated in the previous

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   where ``XXXX-YY-Z`` is the patch number allocated in the previous
```
It may not have been them who did the allocation.

   step. The schema application code only picks up files matching this
   exact naming pattern. It should look like this:

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   exact naming pattern. 
   
   Your patch should look like this:
```
We should separate patch naming from the structure of the patch itself to avoid confusion.

::

   -- Copyright 2026 Canonical Ltd.  This software is licensed under the
   -- GNU Affero General Public License version 3 (see the file LICENSE).

   SET client_min_messages=ERROR;

   -- put your changes in here.

   INSERT INTO LaunchpadDatabaseRevision VALUES (XXXX, YY, Z);

4. Run your new SQL patch on the development database to ensure that it

>    works. Do this by running ``psql launchpad_dev -1 -f your-patch.sql``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Run your new SQL patch on the development database to ensure that it
   works:: 
       psql launchpad_dev -1 -f your-patch.sql
```
Code block is better suited for this

5. Run ``make schema`` again and check that your patch gets applied. This
   is needed to allow the test suite see your changes.
6. You may wish to run ``make newsampledata``, although it isn't

>    critical; this will let you see what changes your patch would make to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. You may also wish to run ``make newsampledata``. Although it isn't
   critical, this lets you see what changes your patch would make to
```
Nit: This is fine, but I'm concerned that the punctuation situation can be a bit confusing.

   initial setups.

>    - This will produce a lot of noise. Feel free to ignore it.

Reviewer: No need to have this as a separate bullet point. It can just be a continuation of the previous paragraph.

7. Review the sample data changes that occurred using ``git diff
   database/sampledata``. This diff can be hard to review as-is. You
   might want to use a graphical diff viewer like ``kompare`` or
   ``meld`` which will make it easier. Make sure that you understand all

>    the changes you see.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   ``meld``. Make sure that you understand all
   the changes you see.
```
The ease is implied by the suggestion to use something different.

8. If you have added, removed or renamed a table or column, ensure that your
   patch includes appropriate ``COMMENT`` statements.
9. **Run** ``make schema`` **again to ensure that it works, and that you now

>    have a pristine database with the new sample data.** If you don't

Reviewer: Why is this in bold?

Author: I've just copied it from the document that is deleted

Author: removed it

>    want to blow away your ``launchpad_dev`` database, then you can use

Reviewer: blow away?

   ``make -C database/schema test`` instead to update only the test
   databases.
10. Make any necessary changes to ``database/schema/fti.py``,

>     ``database/schema/security.cfg``.

Reviewer: What kinds of changes would one be making to these two files?

Author: fti: full text indexes
security.cfg: permissions

11. **Run the full test suite to ensure that your new schema doesn't

>     break any existing tests/code by side effect.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
11. **Run the full test suite to ensure that your new schema doesn't
    break any existing tests/code.**
```
You should also link to the doc on running the full test suite locally here.

Author: It's not actually clear to me that this is needed. This was copied from the old doc, I'm thinking on changing it to a small subset

12. :ref:`propose-a-db-patch`.

Rules for patches
-----------------

* To drop a table, use ``DROP TABLE`` as usual. Make sure that you drop or

>   update any dependent triggers, views and foreign keys before.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* When dropping a table, make sure that you drop or update any dependent triggers, views and foreign keys beforehand.
```

* Do not migrate data in schema patches unless the data size is

>   extraordinarily small (< 100's of rows).

Reviewer: `<`100's of rows` is a bit ambiguous. Are we talking less than 900 rows, or less than 100.

Author: I think we don't have a clear rule

Author: probably the check on how much does it take in staging is the hard rule

* Similarly, new columns must default NULL unless the data size is
  extraordinarily small (< 100's of rows).
* When changing existing DB functions, start your patch with the
  original version (``SELECT pg_get_functiondef(oid) FROM pg_proc WHERE
  proname IN ('foofunc', 'barfunc') ORDER BY proname;``). This makes it

>   much easier to review the diff.

Reviewer: I don't entirely understand this point. Why are we starting with something we might be trying to get rid off?

Author: I guess that it refers to not to start from scratch, but to start from the existing function

Notes on changing security.cfg
------------------------------

If your changes to ``security.cfg`` are additive in nature like adding new
permissions to an existing role or adding a new role, then you can land them
on ``master`` rather than ``db-devel``.
These changes are deployed during no-downtime rollouts.

Any update that revokes permissions from an existing role (including removing
a role entirely), must be landed on ``db-devel`` and deployed during a
fast-downtime deployment. This is because a full update (including revocation)
requires resetting all permissions, which cannot be done without downtime.

> Note that adding new roles requires manual DB reconfiguration, so you need to
> file a ticket to grant access to relevant machines and make sure it is
> resolved **before landing the branch** that needs them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Adding new roles requires manual DB reconfiguration, so you need to
file a ticket to grant access to relevant machines and make sure it is
resolved **before landing the branch** that needs them.
```
Where is the ticket filed and can we link to it?

Author: I've never done that and would like some help.

Sample data
-----------

Let's say your branch needs to make changes to the database schema. You
need to follow the steps on this page to ensure that the sample data is

> updated to match your schema changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your branch needs to make changes to the database schema, the
sample data should be updated to match your schema changes.
```

> We have deprecated sample data. That means that you should never *add*
> new rows to the sample data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Never *add* new rows to the sample data.
```
It's confusing to say we have deprecated sample data. That implies that we are no longer planning to use it. What is the intention in this case?

Author: it means that we don't add new rows to sampledata

> In fact, there are now two sets of sampledata that need to be updated.

Reviewer: This should be connected to the first paragraph in this section. It seems out of place here.

> We use sample data to provide well-known baseline data for the test

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sample data is used to provide well-known baseline data for the test
```

suite, and to populate a developer's Launchpad instance so that
``launchpad.dev`` can display interesting stuff. There are some
guidelines and recommendations you should be aware of before you make
changes to the test suite sample data, or you may break the tests for

> yourself or others.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``launchpad.dev`` can display interesting stuff. Keep the following
guidelines and recommendations in mind before you make
changes to the test suite sample data, or you may break the tests for
yourself or others.
```

Please note that sample data is for developer's instances only. It would

> make no sense to use the sample data on production systems!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sample data is for developer's instances only and is of no use on production systems.
```

If your tests require new data, you should create the data in your
test's harness instead of adding new sample data. This will often make
the tests themselves more readable because you're not relying on magical
values in the sample database. Doing it this way also reduces the chance
that your changes will break other tests by side-effect. Add the new
data in your test's ``setUp()`` or in the narrative of your doctest.
Because the test suite uses the ``launchpad_ftest_template`` database,
there is no chance that running the test suite will accidentally alter

> the sample data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your tests require new data, create the data in your test's harness instead
of adding new sample data. This often makes the tests themselves more readable.
It also reduces the chance that your changes will break other tests. Add the new
data in your test's ``setUp()`` or in the narrative of your doctest.
The test suite uses the ``launchpad_ftest_template`` database, so
there is no chance that running the test suite will accidentally alter
the sample data.
```

> However, if you interact with the web U/I for ``launchpad.dev`` your

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, if you interact with the web UI for ``launchpad.dev`` your
```

changes will end up in the ``launchpad_dev`` database. This database is

> used to create the new sample data, so it is imperative that you run

Reviewer: ```suggestion
used to create the new sample data, so you must run
```

``make schema`` to start with a pristine database before generating new

> sample data. If in fact you do want the effects of your u/i interactions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sample data. If in fact you do want the effects of your UI interactions
```

to land in the new sample data, then the general process is to

-  run ``make schema``
-  interact with ``launchpad.dev``

> -  follow the ``make newsampledata`` steps above.

Reviewer: I don't see these steps

Author: i think its clearer to just tell them to run make newsampledata

**Be aware though that your generation of new sample data will probably

> have an effect on tests not related to your changes!** For example, if

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Be aware that if you generate new sample data, this will probably
have an effect on tests not related to your changes!** For example, if
```

you generate new karma events, you will break the ``karma_sample_data``
tests because they expect all karma events to be dated prior to the year
2002. If you make changes to the sample data, you **must** run the full
test suite and ensure that you get no failures, otherwise there is a

> very high likelihood that you will break the trunk.

Reviewer: `Break the trunk`... how can we express this in a clearer way? New developers may not even know what trunk refers to.

Author: rephrased
